[MUSIC]
Python was created by
Guido van Rossum in 1989
while working at CWI in the Netherlands.
Python was released as
Open Source in February. 1991.
The open source community
grew around the world.
And the first Python workshop
was hosted by NIST in 1994.
>> From 95 to 2000, I worked in the U.S.
in Northern Virginia at CNRI.
And so, there we worked through
a lot of growth of the community and
the infrastructure.
We created the Python website.
I think when I started there,
Python 1.3 was about to be released.
And then while I was there,
we released several subsequent
versions leading up to 1.5.2.
Which for some reason,
1.5.0 was nothing, but
1.5.2 remained the sort of,
the standard, the gold standard of Python
for a very long time afterwards.
Disagreement was brewing between
the people working on Python at CNRI and
the CNRI leadership about open source.
I was sort of courted by
a small no name startup,
and they said, oh,
you gotta come work for us.
We're an open source startup.
We're going to build an
open source portal.
And find a number of other
good Python engineers, and
we'll give you all the time you want
to sort of work on Python full time.
And I thought, wow, that sounds great!
Especially, given that I
already had this sort of
discontent at the place where I
had been for five years, and so,
reluctantly, I agreed to join these guys.
Well, by then, by the time we
actually started, it was 2000.
And with, our start date was May 15,
the bubble had actually already burst.
I wasn't even aware that there was
a bubble and that it had burst.
I was in Northern Virginia
doing open source software.
I wasn't, I didn't really know
what a startup was.
I didn't really know how to tell whether
these people were trustworthy or not.
Well, we spent the summer in blissful
ignorance working full time on Python.
We built and released Python 2,
which was a big deal.
It contained Unicode.
We also,
because we had to have some kind of
graceful exit from my previous employer,
who claimed a certain amount of
ownership over the source code.
They didn't claim that it was all theirs,
because it wasn't theirs to begin with.
It was open source before I joined, which
was an incredibly lucky circumstance.
But, nevertheless, they sort of claimed
ownership over what had been added to it
over the five years I worked there and
other people who were also employed there,
also worked there.
And so, with negotiations
facilitated by Eric Raymond,
and I think also even
more in the background
Eben Moglen, the free software lawyer,
we negotiated some way to make sure
that Python remained open source,
with a license that CNRI's
lawyers were agreeable to.
And that was sort of,
Python still has a very awkward license.
And the history of that awkward
license lies in the way I left CNRI.
So, this little startup,
we didn't even move to the west coast.
We just sort of, we worked from our homes.
And I remember that once a week,
we had a team meeting and
a catch-up with the leadership
in California in my living room.
And within five months, it was over.
They suddenly stopped paying us.
And those five months,
we had had the time of our lives working
on Python, doing this Python 2 release.
We also had to do a Python 1.6 release,
that was actually nearly
identical to Python 2.0.
That was the first Python 1.0
release with CNRI's license on it.
And sort of over the summer and
the fall of 2000,
this startup company began to show
more and more signs of dysfunction.
Other teams suddenly disappeared.
We later heard that they had been fired.
They flew us out to the west
coast to talk to random
potential customers,
to sort of show off our technical prowess
and somehow, get some kind of deal
where we would do work for a customer.
None of those deals ever closed.
So they were going deeper and
deeper in the hole.
And at the end of the year,
the investors decided to stop funding it.
And then suddenly, we were like,
we were out in the streets.
We were relatively well off,
because we had been paid well until then.
But, yeah, the company was gone.
So, what, all we got out of it was,
they had given each of us,
they had bought each of us a good
computer to work from home.
So, that was our last payment.
[LAUGH] Cuz we talked to lawyers or
somehow we got advice where someone said,
yeah, sure.
Just hold onto that equipment.
Nobody's going to have the power
to take that away from you.
They're not going to go after you.
And so, then there was actually,
well I wouldn't call it a bidding war.
But we were negotiating
with both Active State,
which was a small software company
in Vancouver, and Zope Corporation,
which was a small Python-exclusive
software company in Northern Virginia.
And the whole Python labs team,
five of us, ended up working for Zope.
And that was an incredibly lucky rescue.
>> With the terms and conditions that
pretty much keep working on Python, right?
I mean, that
Zope didn't tell you you had to go-
>> No, Zope was very clear.
They said, we have no design on
the ownership of that software.
We want you guys,
you guys are really good programmers.
You guys are the top of
the Python community.
You are going to get some time and
it wasn't stated very
precisely how much time.
And we were fine with that at the time.
We realized that what we had done for
this failing startup was not
actually a realistic option.
That they would just pay our salaries and
we would only do open source development.
Nobody could maintain that, so
we had sort of grown up quickly.
We did continue to do a lot of
sort of fundamental Python
work at the time at Zope.
We also did a lot of
fundamental Zope work.
Over time, sort of, the team dispersed.
I got a job offer to come work for
a small startup again in California.
This time I did my
homework a little better.
Python just kept, sort of, growing, and
the community kept self-organizing.
And so, what started out as
a workshop we had with about 20,
25 people at most attending in '94.
Within a few years,
we had an annual, what we called
the International Python Conference, with
with three or four hundred people attending.
I always encouraged
the community to self-organize
rather than sort of looking at me for
every decision.
And so,
one of the things that gradually appeared
was the notion of Python warts.
I'm not sure, but I think that Andrew
Kuchling was actually one of the first
to talk about Python warts, and sort of
blog about it or give a talk about it.
Of course, different people have different
ideas about what's wrong with Python.
But, sort of the idea of
warts is things that keep
tripping people up over and over.
And so, there is at least some notion of,
these are objectively problems.
Every sort of feature release,
2.1, 2.2, 2.3.
We tried to fix some of these things.
But we also came up against a wall of
things that we could never fix because
the fix was sort of, required changing
the language in an incompatible way.
Because it's always
easy to add new syntax,
that sort of doesn't get in
the way of existing syntax.
But it's very hard to
take away a particular
syntactic construct that has
an unfortunate but well-defined meaning.
And all these things built up and,
sort of,
in the middle of the first
decade of the new century,
this idea of Python 3000 was born.
Like, okay,
we have so many things that we
would like to fix.
We know roughly how to fix them,
but the fix would be incompatible.
Let's create a new version of
the language that fixes a whole bunch
of those things together.
While at the same time, not making
the new version of the language so
different that it alienates the users.
Every year at PyCon,
I sort of take the census of well,
who is using Python 3 and
how committed are they?
And how happy are they?
And sort of,
are there users actually using Python 3?
And, I see tremendous
progress there every year.
But, we're still not, we're not in,
sort of, where we finally want to be.
I mean, at the last PyCon conference,
I had to, sort of, hold off a whole bunch
of people with very good arguments of
why we should do a Python 2.8 release.
And so, Python 3 is winning the race.
But it will, the race hasn't been run yet.
We're still in the race.
It's clear that Python
3 is going to win it.
[MUSIC]